So, functional isomersum. So, what are functional isomersum compounds having say molecular
formula, but they differ in their functional group. Let us see few examples. The first one
see the molecular formula C2 H6O. This can be either an alcohol, let us see H3, CH2O H or
it can be an ether. So, this is an alcohol because it has a OH group, this is R O R. So, which this
is an ether, coming, but look at this, they have the same molecular formula coming to the next
example C3 H6O. So, this can be either an aldehyde. So, it can be either CH3, CH2, CHO. So,
CHO group is the aldehyde or it could be also a ketone that is CH3, CW, CH3. And they have the
same molecular formula coming to the next one, C3 H6O2. So, this could be an acid that is CH3, CH2,
CW, H, or it could be an ester which is CH3, CW, O, CH3. So, this is the acid group, this is the
ester group, R, CW, R is the ester. Coming to the next example, C3 H4. So, this compound can
either have a double bond in their structure or it could also have a triple bond. So, now,
let us see what are the two structures. It could be CH3, C triple bond, CH. So, this is just an
aldehyde because it has only triple bond or it could also be CH2 double bond. So, it can either
process only triple bond or it could process two double bonds. So, that is this is an aldehyde,
this is an aldehyde. Next example, C3 H6N. So, this could be a cyanide that is CH3, CH2,
CN or the point of attachment could be NC which is called the iso cyanide, CH3, CH2,
N triple bond C. So, this is called an iso cyanide, this is called a cyanide group. Now,
coming to the next example, C2 H5ON. So, this could be either CH3, CHW bond, NOH, it is the
auxine or it could be also CH3, CONH2. So, CO and H2 group is the amide group. So, we have seen
all these examples with the same molecular formula, but see how the functional group differs.
Another concept of functional isomerism is double bond equivalent which is denoted as dB E.
So, what is this dB E? This will give us an information about whether there is a double bond or
there is a ring in the structure. Now, this is a J E question, how many possible isomers are there
in this of compound with molecular formula C3 H6O? See, if there is one O there could it could be an
aldehyde, it could be a ketone, it could be an alcohol and an ether. So, now, this with dB E will tell
us what kind of alcohol or ether it is. So, now, let us see the formula for dB, this is number of
carbon atoms minus number of hydrogen divided by 2 plus nitrogen divided by 2 plus 1. If there is no
nitrogen or any other like you know sulfur something, we can just omit this part. So, now, here
in this case, if we calculate for C3 H6O, the number of carbon atoms is 3. So, 3 minus 6 hydrogen.
So, 6 by 2 as I told there is no nitrogen. So, we will just leave that and plus 1. So, this is
equivalent to 1 dB is 1. So, now, if dB is equal to 1, that means, there could be a double bond in
the compound or that could be a ring in the compound. So, this will give us an idea to write
the number of structural isomers possible here. So, now, what so, if there is a double bond as I told,
it could be an aldehyde, C HO. So, you can see the molecular formula is C3 H6O, A and it could be a
ketone here. Now, the alcohol we cannot write the normal alcohol, because the molecular weight will
not match with this. So, now, that means, there is a double bond here. So, I could write an
alcohol here, where a double bond here in this position and OH attached to the C H2. So, this is
one of the isomer. Now, I am just changing the double bond position here and OH, this is another isomer
here, the OH could come to the second position and a double bond here, this is another isomer.
Also, all these compounds that is 3, 4, 5, all these are alcohols. Now, the next one this could
be an ether. So, R, O, R and as I told, it has a double bond. So, only if I put a double bond,
the molecular formula will match with the C3 H6O. So, this is an ether. Now, as I told, it could be a
double bond or there could be also a ring in the compound. So, now, let us start writing.
So, this is the simplest ring, when OH group here. So, this will also match with C3, H6O
or it could be an ether, a cyclic ether. So, or it could be another cyclic ether like this.
So, all these structures are possible, if you take one function to do so. So, that is an aldehyde
is possible, ketone is possible and as alcohol with a double bond and an ether like a normal
ether or with double bond is possible. So, totally how many structures are there? 9. So, the total
possible isomer is 9. So, now, let us see another example with a double bond equivalent for the
compound C4 H6. Let us proceed by calculating. So, DBE will be equal to number of carbon is 4 minus
number of hydrogen is 6 by 2 plus there is no nitrogen, then plus 1. So, DBE will be equal to 2. So,
what is this 2 indicate? So, when DBE is equal to 2, that means, there are two double bonds in the
compound or 1 triple bond or there can be two rings or there could be one double bond and one ring.
So, when we apply all this, like we will see, we will get all these structures.
First, let us see with respect to two double bond. So, the compound having two double bonds is
one and two this two. There are two double bonds and we can see it is C4 H6 and C4 H6.
Only the position of the double bond is varying here. Coming to the next one, one triple bond.
So, there is one triple bond here in the first position or there could be a triple bond in the
second position. So, these two are with respect to triple bond. Now, coming to two rings.
So, there is only possibility is writing the structure like this, where this is considered as
one ring and this is considered as one ring. Now, the next one is one double bond and one ring.
So, it could be like this, that is cyclobutar dying with one double bond or it could be
a three membered ring with one alkyl group here. So, again there could be again three membered ring.
Here, the methyl group is not attached to the double bond, here the methyl group is attached to
the double bond. So, these are again one more possibility and the last one is the double bond is attached
to the alkyl group here. So, again so, to be count the number of high somers,
there are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 are 9 isomers. So, totally there are 9 isomers possible for the compound
having molecular formula C4 H6. So, now let us see the next one in case the double bond equivalent
is equal to 3. So, what are the possibilities? So, in case it is 3, there could be 3 double bond
in the compound or there could be a double bond plus 1 triple bond, 1 double bond plus 2 rings
and 2 double bond plus 1 ring or the final could be there could be 3 rings which are attached to
together.